406198 AGM TRANSCRIPT
Maynard Marks – Craig Robertshaw (CR), Trevor Jones (TJ), David Klosser (DK)
PBB – Clinton Baker (CB) and Graham Kohler (GK)
BCA - Paula Beaton (PB)
Owners – Yong Kiang Law “Law” (LY), Mark Wilson (MW), Wong Thim Chiew (WC)
Committee - Brian Turner (BT)
Time 0:00:00 - 1:20:00
PB – so, welcome to the 2019 AGM of Bianco on Queen. I just thought I’d outline the format for the meeting this evening. We do have a quorum, because a number of you do have proxies. So the process will be that we will pass out the vote for the Chairperson’s position, because that’s resolution 1. And it will be a postal vote, so that you can vote as you wish. What I’d just like to do is that prior to you looking at Resolution 1 which is the Appointment of Chairperson that those nominees would like to perhaps present – just give what they have contributed to the BC, what they feel they could contribute. So Yong, would you like to start?
LW – are we going through the sequence here where Maynard Marks and PBB?
PB – what we’re going to do is elect the Chairperson first, and then-
LW – we should have Maynard Marks and PBB go through the Presentation so that, if we have any questions we can raise and after that they can excuse themselves, because subsequently we have other resolutions which should be relieved to the owners themselves.
PB – so, you feel that-
CRS – yeah, that’s fine
PB – oh, okay. As the incumbent chairperson, you have no issue with that, Brian?
BT – that’s fine.
PB – so, I understand Maynard Marks will be presenting first. So just before we start, I know a lot of you have telephoned and emailed our office understandably for the last year or so. So tonight there’s a chance to ask every possible question that you would like to ask and as one client pointed out, no question is too trivial so please feel free to ask any questions. So will you be starting, Trevor?
TJ – Yep, sure. good evening, everybody, I’m Trevor Jones, the director of Maynard Marks. Hopefully you can hear me out here. I’m here with two colleagues who will be providing the presentation. We have done a substantial amount of investigation as consultants of this building. The last time I got in front of you people I mentioned that we couldn’t give you a good enough definition of the problems in this building until we concluded the work that we were doing last year. We’ve now done that, we’ve issued our report and we’ve given some advice to the BC and the BC lawyers as to how we think things should move forward. It is obviously not our decision, it’s yours. But let me tell you that the things we have found in this building are not trivial. It’s significant, and the presentation will identify that. I’ve got Craig Robertshaw who’s going to talk about the defects that have been identified by us and some other leading consultants in and around NZ and Australia, and David Klosser is a registered architect and a design manager – a lead design manager in our office who has considerable experience in designing remedial solutions in building defects. And he will give you a short presentation on what he thinks needs to be done in order to move things forward. So I guess that’s what we’re here to talk about today. so I’ll just hand it over to Craig who’ll talk through the defects and we’ll have time for discussion, I’d like the presentation to move forward as quickly as possible. You can note down any questions and interject – but if you do interject, it won’t allow for the presentation to be put forward in the way we want to put forward. But there is plenty of time for questions for the remainder of the evening. So I’ll hand it over to Craig now, thank you.
CR – Thank you, Trevor, and good evening. So to provide an update as to where we are with the defect investigation. We spent the majority of 2018 investigating and reporting on the building in conjunction with a number of specialist consultants, and issued our report in November of last year. So the purpose of this presentation is to give you a high level overview of the key issues identified. I’m not going to go into great detail of each aspect, our report was around 1000 pages overall, so there’s obviously a lot of information covered in there. So we’re just going to cover the key issues that we’ve identified. So initially I’m going to talk through the various defects that we identified in the categories that are listed up there, then I’m going to talk through some of the recommended remedial works that flow on from the identification of those defects and then, as Trevor said, how we go forward from there. So in terms of the weather tightness defects, probably the main one that we identified today is the leaking of the cantilevered balconies to the individual apartments. Previously when we were last in front of you guys, we were aware that there was an issue to the balconies because we had seen staining on the underside of the concrete structures, but we weren’t aware at that time of what’s causing that. That’s now changed – we’ve done quite a bit of extensive investigation to those balconies in the form of destructive testing and removing tiles and membranes to see exactly how the membrane’s stressed and how it’s been installed. We found that the main source of water ingress around the perimeter of the balconies where the waterproofing membrane is not adequately terminated against the ribwork on the outside, in the top left corner there. So the effects of this issue, you can see on the right hand side, we’ve got what used to be cork-acoustic board, so that’s installed underneath the tiles and underneath the waterproof membrane. That should stay dry if the waterproof membrane is performing adequately. But as you can see, it’s not, it’s completely saturated, and started to break down. And we’ve seen that in a number of different locations. One key issue with the cantilevered balconies leaking is that we’ve found evidence that the water is not only affecting the balconies but also transferring into the main structure of the building. If you look at the bottom right hand corner, you can see a photograph which shows the water leaking through the joint in the balcony, but it’s also getting in behind where the cladding would be, which has been removed prior to the picture and it’s causing corrosion in some of the components with that wall structure. Moving onto the podium area, we’ve got similar issues to this part of the building as we have with the cantilevered balconies. In the top left hand corner there you can see an example of one of the drainage outlets to the podium area. Membrane isn’t adequately pressed in that outlet so there’s a leaking outlet which has presented itself in the basement level underneath. We also engaged the services of a material specialist who took some samples of the waterproof membrane in various locations, including that one, and analysed the samples under a microscope and he found, in several locations, the membrane was deteriorated and not able to perform in its current state. So we undertook quite a lot of tests in the podium areas and the other photos on that slide give an example of those tests. We flooded the stairs which lead down from the podium to the central walkway. We used red coloured dye to test the performance of the membrane in that location. And then you can see moving down from that building, that the dye appeared in various locations including the cupboard underneath the stairs and also way down in B2 and actually even in B3, so the water transferred all the way down through the basement levels. Another issue which you are probably all aware of if you’ve been down in the basement levels is the leaking through the basement retaining walls. So there’s a few examples there, on the top left you can see significant leaking through that wall in B3. We’ve got evidence of salt deposits in the walls and there’s been lots of attempts made to retrospectively manage this water coming through. So you can see in this example of a drainage tunnel which has been trying to capture this water but generally, that hasn’t been too successful and we’ve been aware that the basement levels flood sometimes during heavy rainfall when there’s been water coming in through those retaining walls. This slides really just here to show the other issues which we identified. So planter box membranes, we’ve identified that the top edge of those are loose and peeling away. So we’ve got water ingress through the back of those membranes. Again, that’s presented itself down in the basement levels. Isolated roof leaks, we’ve found probably a dozen areas around the building where this is water getting in. generally, not that major in the majority of cases – there’s one area where it’s potentially a more pressing issue to put in more consideration moving forward. In the bottom left, we’ve got corrosion to some the metal wall panels, but the middle wall panels are forming some of the walls to the levels in Tower B. and that’s probably the worst case scenario but there are lots of areas of corrosion between the joints between those various areas. Another issue which we’ve recently been involved in investigating is leaking from some of the accessible bathrooms. That photo in the bottom right hand corner – that’s the carpet being lifted from a bedroom adjacent to these leaking showers and you can see that the carpet is completely saturated and the gripper underlay along the outside is beginning to decay. So as Trevor touched upon we’ve engaged several specialist consultants to assist with our investigation so we’ve focused on the weather tightness but we’ve got fire engineer, structure engineer and service engineer amongst others to give us advice on specific issues. So RJ Nelligan and Associates – they’re fire engineers and they gave us a report on the passive fire protection of the building, and they’ve found some defects relating to the building’s ability to prevent the spread of smoke and fire, and there’s a few examples there – a few issues that they found were where fire collars have been installed around penetrations, they’ve not been installed correctly and not in accordance with the manufacturer’s code and good practice – or in some cases, there’s no fire collars there. You can see some pipis penetrating the floor slab, those should have fire collars on them to prevent smoke and fire spreading to the other areas of the building. And also a similar situation with wire penetrations – you can see on the top right hand corner – there’s unsealed holes which need to be protected to stop the spreading. So structural engineering, we’ve got Fraser Thomas to assist us in this aspect of the investigation. You can see there on the top left that’s computer model they made of the building. They took quite a detailed desktop assessment of the building, and a seismic performance review, and they’ve found that generally the building was up to scratch from a seismic point of view with an exception of a few specific areas, including the Tower B corridors which you can see in the top left hand corner photo there – so that’s the corridors which extend between what are effectively two sub towers of Tower B and we’ve essentially got a similar issue with the mezzanine floors in Tower B as well. Some other issues identified by Fraser Thomas are penetrations which are affecting the steel reinforcements – corrosion which has affected some steel elements including the structure of the external staircases. Telco Asset Management have provided expert advice on mechanical, electrical and hydraulic services of the building. One issue that this building has been experiencing is that – essentially from day one, there’s pipe leaking, and the issue’s centred around hot water reticulation pipework – that’s a green plastic pipework. In the top left photo, we were coincidentally there during a live leak so we saw some of the leaking that’s occurring there. And you can see in the top right hand picture there’s a cross section taken through one of those defective pipes and you can see that the inside is deteriorating and beginning to break down and crack. We’ve had material specialists look at that and provide expert opinions on why that’s happening and give explanations as to what’s causing that failure. The flow and effect of this pipe leaking is that it’s damaging internal elements and most importantly it’s damaged the fire rated linings around corridors and around risers, which obviously need addressing to protect and prevent the spread of fire and smoke in the building. Some other issues identified by Telco is the basement trap ventilation system is insufficient – and that provides fresh air down to the basement levels, because there’s no natural ventilation there. And we’ve also identified that there are insufficient seismic restraints, particularly in basement levels. So recommended remedial works – we’ve obviously identified that there are a lot of serious, significant and widespread issues. So obviously flowing from that we’ve recommended significant remedial works to address those issues – very broadly, the remedial works that we’ve recommended include the replacement of all balconies, podium and waterproof membranes, which obviously includes removing the tiles that are fixed on top. We’ve also recommended the replacement of quite significant areas to the exterior wall cladding, primarily to allow for those membranes to be replaced. We’ve also recommended the installation of a system to effectively manage the level of the basement retaining wall leaks. We don't really consider that it’s achievable to actually stop all that water coming through. So it’s really a case of mitigating that water ingress. Then moving onto the specialist issues - we’ve recommended that all the passive fire protection defects get rectified - all of the fire collars get correctly installed and rectified. That will require some removal of internal linings in order to undertake those works. From a structural point of view, Fraser THomas has recommended seismic upgrade work to address those issues - so those stairs, the mezzanine levels, the tower B corridor. And because of the widespread failure of the green plastic pipework, the recommendation has been to replace that entire system. And as well as that, we’ve recommended that there should be improvements to the basement ventilation system to bring that up to standard. So based on that high level scope of works, we undertook a costing exercise - just a preliminary costing exercise at this point. Because, there's still a few unknowns - and those costs have come in at  a range of 26.5 and 32 million dollars, excluding GST. Now I’ll pass you onto David, who will talk through the way forward from here.
DK - good evening, I’m David Klosser. As Trevor mentioned, I’m Team Leader at Maynard Marks, of the architectural team. So what we do is basically take these investigations and plot a way forward to address the defects. We work with specialist engineers and advisors around how we will address the other defects - the structural building services and passive fire issues that we have with the building. We’ll be working though what we call a predesigned - concept design phase - in terms of working out how we should be addressing and mitigating the defects. Some of them will involve the use of facade engineers, structural engineers and fire engineers. And we'll be evaluating different options - it may not be just a straight assessment. We will be looking at alternatives, in terms of a more cost effective approach. And the cost effective may not just be the initial cost to address the defects, but it might also consider long term maintenance. E.g., structural steel is expensive to maintain over a long period of time, so we might be looking at alternatives in terms of addressing those areas. So, along with doing the design work and evaluating the options, there’s a cost estimate exercise to enable you as the body corporate to make a decision as to what is the most cost effective way forward. So, this is the - there will be some design work that will require some specialist engineers to do, as part of building pu the scope of works in the appropriate way to address the defects. Once we’re at the stage where we have that cost estimate, and agreeing with the body corporate with the way forward, there’ll be consenting processes which we’ll be working towards. Considering changes to the appearances of the building is a matter of dealing with the cladding - that;’s likely to bring us into a resource consent process, that is still to be confirmed as we work through that concept design phase, and start talking to Auckland Council, we’d be able to clarify whether or not that phase is required. But we put it on here just to make you aware that we may have to go through that process. The detailed design for building design is about making sure that we design is up to speed with the building code, and getting Auckland Council to sign off on that. Following, and sometimes concurrently, working with the building consent as a contract procurement phase, we’ve also got litigation process following on from construction - there’s some discussions that need to be made to be aware of the order of these particular stages of works. And that’s something that we’d be discussing with the body corporate and committee as we move through the concept design phase. So that’s it from me. Next is, are there any questions for me, Craig or Trevor?
 
 
21:45
MW - who came up with figure of 26.5 to 32 million dollars? Who was the QS of that?
TJ - Maynard Marks, we did it in-house
Maynard Marks or who? Okay, did you do it on the basis of the New Zealand system to just giving it all to one contractor or did you do it on the Canadian system of dividing it up into individual contractors?
TJ - it would have been on a single contractor basis doing the work.
MW- Have you looked at the alternative? I’d just like to note that if you look through the report, a lot of these things are quite minor if you look at, for example, the fire issues, i mean that could be done by a home handyman, essentially. A lot of the stuff is just very HVAC, so we just need a HVAC engineer come in and do it. So there’s quite a lot of US - I mean the Canadians did leaky buildings for 10 years before we got into it, and with the greatest respect to the eternal shame of engineers and architects in NZ, they went down the same road, but the one thing they’ve done is their remedial costs is a percentage value of the buildings, it’s significantly lower than the NZ costs. So, is it possible if the incoming committee ask that you would be able to a QS based on individual issues rather than giving a main contractor tender with 10 or 20% on top?
TJ - i think it’s too early to commit to any contractors contracting the remedials until such time as you’ve agreed to the extent of the remedials that needs to be done. There are different approaches, there are plenty of people around, including on the Committee, who have experience with how contractors have worked. And we will not choose something that doesn’t fit what the body corporate want to achieve.
MW - on the current Committee, is there anybody who has construction expertise and experience? Can I ask, Mr Chairman, what yours is?
BT - i used to be the development manager on a number of projects in the CBD, before I moved back to just doing valuation work.
MW - okay could you just be so kind to tell me, as Developer Manger, were you involved in project management?
BT - yeah I managed the whole project, bringing in contractors and subcontractors.
PB  - i think the question was directed towards this building.
BT  -sorry?
PB - i think he was asking whether you were involved in this building?
BT - no, no, he was asking if I had any experience.
MW - just a couple questions, if I may. Would you agree that Maynard Marks - for example, the fire defects in themselves, one not particularly unusual like fire collars missing, and two, that’s not a hugely expensive cost to fix things like, with fire safety, there's some minor defects in regards to things like collars, and they’re safety wise not minor, but fixing them might be minor, And also the seismic restraints and things like that. Do you agree or disagree?
TJ - i don't agree that they’re a handyman repair for two reasons - one, you need to get to the location of the individual problem and that’s not a simple operation in a lot of circumstances because they’re behind wires and above ceilings and they have a knock-on effect, and two, being compliant, someone needs to check that they are compliant. And then that process, that’s not a handyman operation, unfortunately we have to engage - not unfortunately, actually, we have to engage, in the compliance sense, the building code, get the work to a building code standard and get that work approved and signed off by a compliance officer.
MW - i apologise for using the term ‘handyman’, but when you get access to those things, those are not complex
TJ - well if you have the right skillset, I’d think so. But I wouldn’t like to handle that, personally.
MW - no but if you’d perhaps answer the question - if you get to the problem, they’re not technically complex.
TJ - well, I think you need to think about specific instances, because if you actually have a system - you need to have a system that not just plugs the hole but plugs the hole in a way that remains compliant, so it’s not just a question of squeezing in a bit of fire sealant into the hole. It needs to be engineered to meet a tested system, I don’t disagree with you that they are not unusual, we’re finding these in a lot of buildings, but it doesn’t mean that we’ve got it right in the past, we’ve got to get it right now
MW - would you agree that the structural engineering defects that have been identified - they’re not structurally impacting on the building’s strength and safety?
TJ - I’m not an engineer so, I can’t give you the reassurance that you are looking for. But it’s not been put in an earthquake prone category, but this stage, to give you a building that is seismically a lot better than what it currently is, which has two potential problems - it doesn’t perform in the way that it’s meant to, at the design stage, it could mean that the building has significant problems for you down the track, and in terms of insurance or repair, but also - potentially in the form of loss in value.
MW - just last two questions - are you able to say what % of the balconies are deficient?
TJ - everywhere that we’ve looked the defects exist. We have looked at about-
CR - 25%?
DK - we’ve looked at about 10 cantilevered balconies in detail. And every one has shown o have issues.
MW - and last thing is, could the Body Corp Committee have a copy of this report with your workings on the QS?
TJ - in terms of delivery, our ability to see the report, I’ll have to defer this to the legal team to handle that, because, you may or may not be aware but there is a high court proceeding in place, and there is privilege attached to the report. So we’ve delivered it to the Body Corporate, the BC legal team, and they’ll give you advice on how that should be distributed and made available. I know in the past, copies have been made available for reading but not for removal. And I’m not sure if that’s the way it will be done here.
MW - but you’ve received instruction from the BC Committee or no?
TJ - oh, we will do what we’re instructed to do, I’m sure, after the Committee takes legal advice.
LY - my name is Law. I am a Committee member for 9 months, and I very much agree that we should go to litigation in order to fix some of the real defects that are happening. But where I feel and I need to clarify this with you guys is, the strategy approach that has been taken and whether there is a better way of doing things. Now, for the 9 months and all that, we have been given very little directions to define the outcome and Maynard Mark has been a very profit-driven company - you do what you need to do. To do all the investigation needed or not needed to come up with a comprehensive report. It is a 1000 page report. Now the question I have is, and I believe that Craig has answered me this when I visited you, you say that you have done a sampling of about 50 units for the balcony, is that correct?
CR - in terms of visual assessment, that’s probably about right.
LY - okay, so you told me that of these 10 of these 50 - 10 of these units were found to have issues. And that was in the report - correct?
CR - i think what I would have said is that we would have investigated around 10, and those were found to have issues.
LY - can i ask again did you actually do assessment of 50 balconies or did you not?
CR - i dont have the exact numbers
LY - yeah i was told about 48.
CR - we probably looked at about 40.
LY - okay, that's fine. So of those 40, 10 had defects, right? So, I have read through the report quite thoroughly and you have shown those defects - I will share with owners as well - and I just want to point out an important thing as well, when we have the defects - is it a case that every one of them is present with them or is it a case with that the worst one is shown? That's just the first question.
CR - so where we investigated the balconies thoise photographs will be shown in the report.
LY - because, from where I see, and from physical visits, I see that many of these balconies indeed have some staining, but it is not as severe as every one of them that is shown here. I see one that is significant but the rest, in no official way, I’m just extracting off the report, looks no serious.
CR - yeah I mean any water coming from the side of a balcony indicates that there is a fairly old waterproofing membrane. So i dont think its really a case of it being more or less severe that there is water staining on the underside of the balcony. It’s the condition that shows that there is something wrong with the balcony.
TJ - i think the other significant point is that everywhere we did a destructive investigation we found damage and decay in a material that should not even be wet, let alone decaying. We found water getting into the building - and you don't have to be an expert to understand that water getting into the building from the outside is a problem.
LY - Mr Trevor, did I hear that you are not an engineer. Are you an engineer, by the way?
TJ - no i'm not a structural engineer.
34:10 Paula Recorder
X - one question, you say that everything - every apartment that you have investigated has the problems. That's like saying that even in this-
TJ - No, one of the recommendations that have given - one of the key several recommendations we have given is to confirm that understanding the problem is throughout. Now, you can choose not do that additional investigation-
X - so you’re sure that all the-
TJ - if I can finish? I’m speaking if you haven't noticed. You can choose not to do anything further, but my experience of looking at buildings for 40 years, is that these kinds of issues don’t get better, they get worse. And the consequences get worse, and then the costs escalate. So if you can get to it sooner, you can keep your costs sooner than if you allow it to drag on and let it get worse. The deterioration will continue, in my opinion. I’m very happy for you to get another opinion, and they can look at our report and give you their advice. But that is our advice.
LY - i don't think we are not talking about not doing a remediation. That’s not what we are saying. What we are saying is that we have to look at it from precautionality/proportionality?, from severity, and decide what the remediation should be. So maybe this is not the opinion of this owner here, but this is my view, that we have to do a remediation - how we do it is important because it has to be dealt with from precautionality/proportionality??, severity perspectives. I’ll just separate the issues - I was reading the report from consultants - I think it’s Grayson - so this is extracted from their report, correct me if I’m wrong - “it has been reported that everything has been done correctly, except that at the age where the upturn is, the waterproofing membrane has not been lifted up fully.” And in terms of other investigation, like how well the tiling has been done, whether the membrane has been applied. All these, the report came in positively. Is that correct?
TJ - generally, yeah, the main issues have been identified in that diagram.
LY - Okay, thank you. So based on that, I don't know Maynard Mark’s summary report, you categorically say that Grayson says that the membrane is not - let me read what it says - ‘the manufacture data sheet does not specify the deposit can be installed.’ but in this report he did follow up, saying that he also did not prohibit the use of it. So by (inaudible) it caused a lot of confusion with that statement for us readers and us. Coupled with the fact that there are already 10 units - 40 units - which have demonstrated some kind of defect - to go into a remediation that is needed and to have the type of remediation where we knock down every house, everything. There is some things that we need to rethink - that’s what i'm trying to say. I will go on to say - 3 line items that Maynard Marks suggested in the Remediation work - first line item, balcony - costing about $3.9 million, second item, cladding - costs us around $1 million, third item, joinery - costs us almost $2 million. When we started this litigation, this defect investigation, it was because the basement wall was leaking. Everybody knew about it - when it rains, water seeps in. but when the results came in - I couldn't find any line about the basement. I’m sure it will be remediated. But it seems like the focus has shifted towards something that we weren’t expecting. And I have a problem with that. Now, talking about cladding - it was the second line item in your proposal. It was written in consultant’s report, and I’m sure that you’d agree with it because there was a lawyer who said the same thing, the consultant says that the cladding is generally very well done. There are some defects here and there are and acknowledge it, but the main thing was that it was generally very well done. So wit that in mind, we have to spend money then to do a re-cladding which is something I feel we are going down the track. $2 million on joinery. I read the 1,000 page report, I tried to match it with all the defects that you are trying to put out to us. I have difficulty trying to understand what this joinery defects are all about.
TJ - wel it's not actually a defect in the joinery, it's a consequence of another defect. The membrane, balcony problem requires that we remove the joinery to address the membrane. And that’s one of-
PB - is that because of the gap?
TJ - yeah, one remediation design. So it's not something that we are surprised - i understand that you are, i’m hearing that you’re surprised. But we can walk and talk with you through the design issues. You'd need to accommodate the reason for the joinery to come out while there’s a costing in relation to that. It's not something that we want to do, it's something that is required to be done.
LY - so, I’m understanding even now that the $2 million is to be spent on the joinery and that’s a consequence of the - it’s not actually a direct defect.
TJ - not that we’re aware of.
LY - okay, so these are 3 top line items that I took up and feel uncomfortable but i don't think we want to go through them at the AGM because there are too many tiny details, and I will leave them as such.
 
42:00
Asian guy white hair/WC? = I have a question, can someone - three way who can see the basement, the stain
PB - sorry, it's just so we’ve got people listening in
Eugene - can you remove the streaming?
PB - oh they’re your owners who want it to be streamed.
Eugene? - Who? If anyone doesn’t want streaming.
PB - we have no problems no streaming, we have people
MW - as a point of order, can we ask who wanted this to be streamed?
PB - yes, sure. Can Jayshree get a list?
Asian man white hair - what’s going on? Streaming? Why are they not informed?
Eugene - they are not informed
PB - well they’re your fellow owners, they asked. We’ve gone through a lot of trouble to get this.
Asian man white hair - yeah we got an email but it was so so last minute.
(heated discussion over it)
PB - well we’ll get the names, they’re your fellow owners, but let’s get the list. We can take them off.
LY - we did sign a declaration not to give away any sensitive information that is being talked about here.
PB - yes we have asked.
(more heated discussion between Eugene and the white haired man)
MW - just a specific question - who specifically asked for the stream?
PB - Jayshree, she’ll give you the names of the people who asked. I can absolutely assure you and minute it that there were owners who emailed in and asked for that option. We have never done it before incidentally
LY - yeah you can do the minutes, that's no  problem. But can we remove the audio streaming for security
PB - absolutely, if that's what you want.
LY (could be Eugene) - because there is so many sensitive information. Thank you very much. Remove this. Anybody who supports this? Hands up. Breach is a serious one. If nobody gives consent, you shouldn’t stream.
PB - so i’ll just give you the names, because they are your fellow owners who have asked. So it's just to let you know that it’s Richard Chu who is 3E/2 of Yunnan Investment
ET - I’m the proxy, it’s okay.
PB - absolutely. We’ll just get the list. But if you want it removed, we can remove it immediately. That's absolutely not a problem.
Thank you very much, Paula.
White hair - please let us know first. If you want to do it next year, that’s fine.
PB - we don't want to do it, the owners did. We’re more than happy to take it off.
White hair - my question is - is this something that happened overnight? Can someone tell me?
CR- as far as-
White hair - we have a building manager onsite, right? I know you wouldn't be able to answer the question because you only probably saw it last year or so. So can somebody - building manager? Who’s the building Manager? No one?
PB - yeah i think Bill’s here. Bill?
WC - Yeah because this thing here can’t happen overnight. I’m not an engineer ot expert, but from the way it looks, isn't it 5 years or more?
CR - essentially
WC - essentially. So therefore the lack of maintenance clearly demonstrated that, and the maintenance, if i'm the building manager or the hotel operator - and together with the committee of the past 5 years or so, they haven't addressed this issue. That's what i want to say.
CR - i don't agree that it's a lack of maintenance in relation to the leaking through the retaining walls in the basement,. It's not a maintenance issue, it's a building defect. It cannot be overcome by maintenance alone.
WC- but it isn't highlighted, right?
Lady - just to confirm him - the basement 1, i think the hotel has rented a parking which is attached to the building and that’s when the heavy rain comes in, all the water comes from there. And i don't think any other people using the hotel is using that basement area.
CR- a lot of the issues shown in the slide here are well aware from that happening in the car park area to B1 -
Lady - this is not part of the building, this is like attached to the building for some reason. So the wall - there is a gap in between the building itself and the hotel. I don't know if that would - i mean in the first place, obviously it would have taken some consent, but that would let water into the basement. And i guess that they would be responsible for that issue.
CR- no the issue that we identified are widespread throughout the basement areas. It's not related to there being a specific access route from the building to the adjacent building.
Lady - so this is the basement I’m talking -that’s the problem in the basement that I’m talking about - all the water comes into the wall of the basement.
TJ - we are aware of, from the podium area there, there being a whole lot of water running directly from a stairwell and into the basement, and we are aware that there is a gap between the buildings. But these photographs are not related to that issue. This is a building defect that we’re talking to.
Lady - but are these defects considered into the report at all?
TJ - we’ve identified those issues, we just haven't illustrated them here because that’s not a high level issue. Something that requires building rectification
Man - so we asked you to fix this and you give us another 1000 defects. How are you going to fix this? Are you trying to fix this at all? Are you focusing on this because I don't see - it just looks like you’re focusing on tearing down the building.
TJ - i think you’re doping the presentation a disservice by saying it. I'm offended by what you just said. I’m very offended by what you just said. Our report covers in detail - very significant detail - what we have found with the building. We’re trying to simplify it so those in the audience can understand, but it’s a 1000 page report, which we’ve tried to condense into a few very simple photographs , to simply present the issues. These are not simple issues, as i’ve said in my opening, it’s a very serious building.
LY - Can i speak please? I have read through the 1000 page report quite a few times. I must say that there is really insufficient focus addressing how the basement leak, from the wall itself, can be addressed, or should be addressed. And maybe i share this sentiment and probably don't stress it properly but i share the sentiment that the whole building health investigation started from visible things that we were seeing on a daily basis. But unfortunately the report itself did not adequately address how the remediation can be carried out. Given the summary of the repair scheme, didn't give enough information on how it can be done.
TJ - well i think that is the way forward. That report was never going to give you a detailed remediation scheme, because it could not have done that.
LY - you could not have done it?
TJ - we could not have done it in our report because it requires a lot of detailed design and-
 
50:50
Man - BT - can i just clarify one thing here - can we just go right back to the beginning- the first EGM we realised that our 10 year time period was getting awfully close. So we decided as a BC, at that EGM, that we’d start the legal proceedings while we did the investigation. Now, we are at the stage now with the investigation is finished - that’s the report - it doesn't address design issues on how to remediate. It just identifies the problems. Stage 1. Now I said at that EGM that I hope that when that report comes out there’s nothing substantial in it. We could just pack up and go home. So, what i think Maynard Marks are trying to explain to us is that what they have found is not trivial. It's not something that could be remediated on a long term maintenance plan, over a 5 year period. We’re talking something that has to be proceeded with - if i'm reading it right - with litigation to recover the costs. Because it is substantially more than a long term maintenance issue. Okay, so this is a problem-identifying report. It's not a solution report.
LY - So let me just say that I have read this 1000 page report - there are many remediation recommendations that have been put forth in the report, so it's not true to say that it is identifying defects. If that's the intent, then certainly the 1000 page report does more than what it is supposed to do. There is lots of remediation that has been recommended, the thing that i'm trying to explain is that when it comes to these leaking walls, which has been very obvious on theo nset - the content and scope and detail are a little bit more lacking compared to the tons of report made on the balcony, and so on and so forth. so , really, we started off having issues with the ground in the basement, and if you’re saying ‘we probably need to do more for the fire remediation scheme,’ it means that the report is not fully done.
TJ - so, I’ll just take the points that you made there. There are recommendations - where we can give reasonable recommendations, we’ve done that. There are recommendations for the drainage issues, and the retaining wall issue. There are recommendations - they’re actually in the structural engineer’s report, he’;s even done a sketch, if i remember rightly, of how that can be done. That was never going to be a detailed document but it has given a possible way forward. And a reasonable way forward. So i don't agree with your comment that there is nothing there  about it - there is something there about it. You’re wrong.
LY - i agree that there was in the report itself a recommendation for remediation, at first, at the basement with regards to the drainage issue, which is what you've just said. I don't dispute that
TJ - so i don't understand your criticism there
LY - i'm not criticising
TJ - well it sounds very much to me like you are.
LY - i'm just saying that when you talk about water coming out from the wall - that there is an issue that everyone know, and we want to know how it can be repaired. Or are you saying that there is no way of repairing it - that water will still come out and then we will just have to live with it and improve drainage and things will be done in that way?
TJ - that's the current thinking, yes.
LY - okay, so i understand you. But this is not what i would prefer to be done, because we know that there was a problem with the leaking and we now understand that probably we will not be able to improve that link, we will work on the drainage, and that will be the way to remediate this.
TJ - in a reasonably cost effective solution. If you throw enough money at anything, you can start all over again. That's not what we’re intending to do.
BT - i think Maynard Marks explained it. They've said that if we move to develop design, they will come up with solutions, which will be priced and we will have to decide which way forward. And it may be the case that the most expedient one will be the simplest one i.e. let the water come through the wall and deal with it once it gets there, because the cost of other options to seal up the basement may be prohibited.
LY - so i imagine that that should be the basic intent for the basement wall - it should be the basic intent for the balcony, for everywhere that we see - if it is not severe or widespread, then we should implement a remediation that is proportionate to the defect itself, rather than coming up with a proposal that require us to take down every balcony and re-do everything, which is a very costly thing.
 
56:30
Hugh - i have a question about the balconies - my name is Hugh, i own 2 units in Tower B. so some questions about the balcony - i read the report, some balconies have the problems with the upstand of the membrane, and some others don't have a problem with that. Is that correct?
CR - when you say problem with the membrane-
Hugh - so you’re saying that with some balconies the membrane terminates here, where there is a problem but other units have the full drainage and the upstand of the membrane, which is okay.
CR - it's always dressed up, the upstand on that side. The main issue that we found in the left hand side - that's the problem there
Hugh - okay, I see - so i see in the report that you investigated the unit in my balcony 4A/1, where you say there's no problem at all, it has perfect upstand. But the problematic underneath the membrane is still wet. So you’re saying the problem is over where which is causing the membrane to be wet. That’s correct?
CR - yep so water's getting in the left hand side where the membrane is not adequately detailed. It’d be soaking into the cork, essentially.
Hugh - so your recommendation is to rip everything out because the membrane is stuck to the tiles. So you have to rip everything out. But if we seal it here, is that a solution? If water comes in here, if we just sell it here and problem solved?
CR - any remedial solution that we look to address there - we have to make sure that it's a robust solution that's going to meet the durability requirements of the building code. As part of the proposal, Auckland Council  will be reviewing that proposal and will want to get sufficient comfort that that particular solution will last the 15 years and that we won't have an issue occurring again.
Hugh - so you're not ruling out that solution?
CR - so unfortunately, Auckland Council won't approve of just putting a bit of sealant in that location.
Hugh - you’re sure about that?
LY - i don't think you should say it like ‘putting a bit of sealant’
CR  - yeah just let me explain. What we’ve got is decay under the cork, and the decay in the cork - the effect is that you’re getting water in that location. We need to have an adequate solution that not only deals with the junction that’s currently failing, but making sure that sufficiently deals with the rest of the balcony. Unfortunately, to address that particular defect, it does mean that we have to pick up the tgiles, pick up the cork and replace it with an alternative. And as a result of that, it does have an effect on the joinery and the cladding.
Hugh - and i also heard that you guys reviewed about 40 balconies and about 10 balconies had that problem?
CR - we investigated around 10.
TJ - so there’s two different things - there’s those who were investigated from a visual perspective, there were 10 that were done as a destructive investigation -
PB - sorry gentlemen can I just pause at this point, I just want to make sure that everyone in the back can hear without a microphone?
(yes)
PB - okay just wanted to check, sorry.
TJ - so, of the 10 that we did a destructive investigation, we found that they were 100% defective balconies. So it wasn't just 25%, it was 100% that we established were defective. So if we od go into litigation, it's likely that we’d need to go into more investigation. But in terms of this report , in terms of giving useful guidance as to the severity and extent of the issue that we have, we feel quite comfortable in finding 100% that we’ve got a systematic issue across all the balconies. But for evidence, we will need to go and do more investigation
Hugh -and do you think this is asystematic issue - a compliance issue? Is this consented by Council and that has been faulty?
TJ - correct
PB - it's the building act breach. It's a building act breach which is replicated amongst many buildings around Auckland.
TJ - so one of the things that - the body corporate have instructed us to do this investigation so we can get a really good  understanding of the defects in this building, so if we are going through a litigation claim, you are able to adequately seek recompense for those defects. If we had not investigated and we didn't do a1000 report, you would have effectively been in a situation where you couldn't have gone forward with this potential litigation claim
Is this the only problem you found with the balcony? Are there any systematic problems with the balcony?
CR - there are a few similar issues, but that's the main one that’s widespread through auckland.
Hugh- okay, thank you.
Lady2 - so i have a couple questions. So you mentioned the cost of it, but you didn't mention how long it would take to do the remediation and also from when it can be started?
TJ - so there’s-
(interruption form ringtone and laughter)
TJ - so there’s quite a lot of work for us in terms of looking at how long things are going to take, and when it's going to start -there’s a lot of unknown factors which come into it. One of the factors around the need for time taken, is around the extent of work. The concerns around the green pipe, for instance. We have to get  to the green pipe and replace it. That could take a bit of time. So that requires a lot of work, we also don't know how long it's going to take to do that, or how we might be able to stage the work. How are we going to get multiple floors at the same time - get everyone out and do the work concurrently throughout the buildings. The other aspects are around the litigation and whether or not we litigate first before we repair, or whether or not we do the repairs first and then litigate afterwards. So those are decisions that i don't think have been made yet, so there’s quite a few things that we need to work through with the BC COmmittee in terms of around timing. And generally, in terms of the actual process of doing the actual repairs and how long it takes, we always get involved with foreign contractors. They look at the work and judge what they can reasonably achieve. And the other aspect is balancing how long the owners can be out of their units, or tenants being out of their units. So there are a lot of things that we have to go through. So, at this point in time, i won't be able to give you an adequate answer.
Lady2 - Right, and what is the reason for further investigation? Because this report seems to be quite complete, like, why hasn’t the remediation started - do we need to do the investigation again?
TJ - so theres a number of things that we need to work through in terms of, for example, the cladding replacement. When you’re talking about cladding replacement on a building the size and height that you’ve got, there's a number of factors that we need to consider and understand around the building and building movement that are quite specific to buildings of this height. So there's some of that analysis that needs to be done by structural engineers, there’s some further investigation that needs  to be done from a structural perspective. Particularly, around the defects in the mezzanine levels on the apartments around Tower B stairs - so in order for us to provide an adequate design solution, we need to better understand those issues before we move forward and give an appropriate solution. So these are further investigations are things on the mechanical side, and other building services. We have - as much as the work that we have done already, there are still some holes in there that we need to close off in order to give an adequate concept design and design moving forward.
Lady2 - so what you're saying is if there’s a different contractor who you want to do the work - you need to do the design work before doing the actual work so, by doing your report, it means they don't have to do the full design anymore and they can just go straight to the next step of doing the actual work?
TJ - yes, that's exactly right. There's also the aspect where any design work that we do in the building from Auckland Council’s perspective - they're going to want to see that design and sign it off if it's up to code before getting the actual work done. So, the BC need to go through that consent process as well. And in order to do that, there needs to be specialist design engineers as well as us documenting and doing other work associated with that.
Lady2 - thank you.
MW (i think) - Can i just say that we all appreciate that this has been a difficult evening for Maynard Marks - engineers and specialist engineers aren’t usually used to being addressed in the terms that have been given today, but you can appreciate that there are tens of thousands of NZ owners who have been bankrupted by these sorts of things, and while it doesn't in any way involve Maynard Marks, the reality is if the engineers, as a group, as an industry, and the architects as a industry, had done their job when all these buildings were being built, this would not have happened. And it's certainly not a problem - I’ve worked in America, Australia and China - it doesn't happen there. So it's certainly not something that the architects and engineer can look back and say that ‘this is a big success’. So I do ask you to take into consideration -I’m sure that a few of you, in some cases, could look around at these faces facing possible liquidation, you’d be taking it pretty badly. particularly, when it's not your fault - nobody can blame the owners of this. So, i do hope that Maynard Marks accept the background to this. And also, as i said, their industry cannot look back and say that this was a success.
PB - thank you, there were two gentlemen -
 
1:08:13
LY - so i'm trying to refrain from talking about the other aspects apart from the 3 line items which i brought up earlier, but the question that has always been asked - i want to talk about structure. Now, as far as engineering practice is concerned, we are dealing with investigating into a physical building trying to find out whether the building is still acceptable, in terms of (inaudible). To do a reverse engineering, to come from a design review perspective, and to decide whether a structure of a building has a problem, requires simulation, which was done in the report. Now this simulation is a very complex and tricky business. Why is this so? Because simulations require you to have a very accurate model of the building itself. Simulation require you to do very good parameters, in order to give the right outcome. In the report itself, it says that ‘depending on the parameters that have been selected, the outcome of the simulation (inaudible) very significantly. So i want to ask this question - why do we ever have to reach a stage where we are trying to do a design review of a building that is built using a methodology that is complicated, intricate, very difficult to prove whether it is right or wrong
TJ - i think that i already explained that we are not structural engineers, Fraser Thomas, who have exceptional reputation around NZ for being good structural engineers, modelled the building around what they believed to be a reasonable and applicable approach using the standards that are available. So, the answer really is that they have done a job as thoroughly as they can to give us advice that we have provided in the report. And it was peer-reviewed and it did change during the course of the investigation - the outcomes of their recommendations. So it's a very detailed review and that led to the outcome that we have. So it would need to be peer reviewed, any solutions from here on in, and that is what we have recommended today.
LY - so i'd like to say that we are for remediation. It's just the strategy and outcome that we want that we have to think through very carefully. And it's not just about the structure, the other aspect is the (joss?) coming in from the basement - again, another simulation was done. I find it very uncomforting - again, it's a simulation - i think if we were really doing a proper job, you have to do a physical measurement of the toxic level of carbon monoxide or whatever. Any period of time, whatever, we would know whether there is a problem. And I can tell you for one, basement car park - hardly any cars are there. And because of that - that kind of investigation is better for coming up with an outcome, rather than simulations. So I refrain from trying to go too far into details of other investigations, but because this has been brought up so many times i just want to give my comments there
TJ - just, in terms of the mechanical engineering side of things, that was performed by Telco, they have to review the existing against the standards that are required, not against a half dozen cars that may or may not be in the garage at any one time, because that is a moment in time, not a standard that needs to be achieved. So i appreciate your candid views on that it may or may not be a problem, but in terms of achieving a standard which is what we have to measure it against, that has to be done.
LY - i can agree with you, provided that the simulation is an accurate simulation. Which is very difficult to prove
Man3 - I have a question about hot water systems and pipes. So in page 736 on this report, it says that the DWH storage temperature was set at 51C and on page 790 it says the higher rate of the (rasion?) of the PPR in White Street apartments appears to be promoted by a combination of continuous exposure to high temperatures up to 60 degrees. If the temperature was set to 51 degrees, how can it be contributing as a factor to continuous exposure to high temperatures up to 60 degrees?
TJ - i don't have an answer.
PB - who did that part of the report, I can probably get you an answer.
TJ - Telco.
PB - I can undertake to get an answer on that specific point
Man3 - and also on the bottom of page 776 it says to reduce the bacteria risk, they recommend to set the temperature to 65 degrees C, and they say that ‘we acknowledge this increase in temperature will further increase the life for the stress cracking and so we recommend that the PPR pipe to be replaced with PPRC pipes.’ is that correct?
TJ - that's what it says, that’s correct
(laughter)
PB - I think we’re talking the Fusio pipes issue, which is seriously a whole separate issue. But i can get answers on that one.
Man3 - okay, great, sorry. Another question - it says that the factors contributing to the degradation of the pipes is the aggressive nature of chlorine water supply. Chlorine is more than 40 PPM. is that a standard in Auckland - if the water in the entire city is high chlorine, why are we having this problem?
PB - Clinton may be able to comment further, but the issue of these fusio pipes is, i think, identified that half a dozen apartment blocks in the proximity of Bianco. So it is a common problem in blocks around Auckland - that I can confirm.
Man3 - alright, and they say that they previous thing of the PPR pipes is the thermal and mechanical stress on these pipes. I didn't find more detail on that. Every building has stress -  you have a pipe, it has stress. Why do we have more stress that's causing the premature falling of these pipes?
PB - so, if you gentlemen don't want to comment further on these fusio pipes, Clinton might be able to add a little bit more, you know?
CB - well, I'm obviously not an engineer but I can tell you that this building is not the only building that I know of that's experiencing the same problem and having to replace all of its hot water pipe system. As Paula said there are about 4 or 5 in Auckland who might personally know of. There are other buildings that I have been told about. I had a phone conversation with a man from Queenstown and there are about 8 buildings there that he represents where their pipes have failed as well. It's exactly the same pipe. It's happened in Australia, as well. So it's a very widespread problem, not just this building. There's a problem with the product, as I understand it, and the composition of our water.
LY -  so can I just comment - i read through the report as well, the report says that the hot water pipe that has been used is the best one that they can find. They have a full range of product reading from 7.4, 11 etc. it says that the one that's been sued is 7.4, and in their old catalogue that is the best product in terms of ability to withstand temperature, and pressure. So because you made the comment that it could be a product - obviously from the report itself it seems it says that in Australia it says that it's been used successfully.
CB - but that's not correct in Australia. I know personally that there’s been more - i don't know anything about the pipes personally but there’s been more suits in Australia against that.
LY - so i'm just explaining to you what i read in that report. So what was it said about the pipe, it said that it's a combination of water, pressure pulsating, coupled with high temperature. But it doesn't really gel together really well because the catalogue of the material says that it can withstand the temperatures that we have here.
CB - yeah there are alternative theories because that’s just - that scientist has evaluated it to come up with his explanation as to why they are failing, and he would say that that is why all the pipes are failing throughout the building i know about. There is another scientist i know who hasn't been engaged yet, because of the conflict, who had another idea as to why the pipes were failing due to the ionisation from the copper pipes in the boiler, which is used in NZ and Australia but not in EUrope. So these are people trying to come up with explanations as to why.
LY - maybe I can just add a remark to Maynard - maybe you could follow up with the consultant - it's important to investigate material failure which was done in this 1000 page report. It Is equally important to explain to us how this piping design has been done constructed. None has been explained. So when you investigate the material failure and it says that everything is good as far as pressure and everything concerned. The other aspect of how it has been designed is how they are connected to each other - how the larger pipe is connected to a smaller pipe. This was not explained. Perhaps from that angle we will be able to better understand how it failed, and not just from investigating material failure.
Continued in next document